XLS-45: Prepublish validator lists (#124)
XRPLF/XRPL-Standards: XLS-0045-prepublish-validator-lists/README.md

<pre>
title: <b>Prepublish Validator Lists</b>
type: released in rippled 1.7.0
description: Future activation date and improved expiration handling of UNLs
author: <a href="mailto:ed@ripple.com">Ed Hennis (Ripple)</a>
</pre>

## Abstract

> Adds a future effective date to UNLs so that all nodes in the peer network can switch to a new UNL simultaneously. 
> Creates a new version of the VL file spec to allow publishing multiple UNLs in one file, including current and
> future UNLs. Adds enforcement of the UNL expiration date so that rippled will act similarly to being amendment
> blocked if it has no active valid UNL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each XRPL server (node) must be configured with a UNL (Unique Node List), which
lists the validating nodes that the server considers trusted. A validator list
includes the public key of the list publisher, a manifest, a signature, a
version, and a base64-encoded blob that contains a UNL.

This document defines version 2 of the VL (Validator List) spec. Compared to
version 1, it adds a future effective date so that nodes in the peer-to-peer
network can switch to a new UNL simultaneously. It also supports publishing
multiple UNLs in one file, allowing future UNLs to be included alongside a
current UNL.

This spec also defines the enforcement of the UNL expiration date so that a
server will act similarly to being amendment-blocked if it has no active valid
UNL.
```
(hard wrapped to 80)

> :bangbang: Note that these changes were merged into rippled in
>     [1.7.0-b10](https://github.com/XRPLF/rippled/pull/3720) on
>     January 11, 2021. The original pull request was titled
>     ["Support UNLs with future effective dates: (UNL v2)"](https://github.com/XRPLF/rippled/pull/3619). The
>     original specification was published on a (now?) private repository. The purpose of this XLS is to make
>     the specification of these changes more accessible so that related tooling can be updated, and to make it
>     easier for UNL publishers to use the new format. Any improvements to this spec can be integrated into
>     rippled in a later pull request. Most of this content is written from the perspective of rippled before
>     these changes were merged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This spec was finalized and implemented in `rippled` version
[1.7.0-b10](https://github.com/XRPLF/rippled/pull/3720) on January 11, 2021. The
original pull request was titled ["Support UNLs with future effective dates:
(UNL v2)"](https://github.com/XRPLF/rippled/pull/3619). The purpose of this XLS
is to make the specification of these changes widely accessible so that related
tooling can be updated. Any further improvements to the VL format should be
defined in a new spec and implemented in `rippled` with a new pull request. Most
of the following content is written from the perspective of `rippled` before
these changes were merged.
```

https://vl.ripple.com/) is

```
{
  "public_key" : string representing the publisher's hex-encoded master
    public key,
  "manifest" : string representing the base-64 or hex-encoded manifest
    containing the publisher's master and signing public keys,
  "version": unsigned integer representing the VL format version. Currently
    only 1 is valid,
  "signature": string representing the hex-encoded signature of the blob
    using the publisher's signing key,
  "blob": string representing base-64 encoded JSON containing the actual list.
    See below
}
```

The `blob` format is

```
{
  "sequence" : Unsigned integer sequence of this VL. The sequence number
    must increase monotonically. More specifically, validator lists with
    sequences less than the current are ignored. The special sequence
    UInt(-1) indicates that the master key is revoked,
  "expiration" : Unsigned integer representing the ripple time point when
    this list will no longer be valid,
  "validators" : [
    {
      "validation_public_key" : hex-encoded master public key,
      "manifest" : (optional) base64 or hex-encoded validator manifest
    },
    ...Optionally repeats...
  ]
}
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

"[ripple time](https://xrpl.org/docs/references/protocol/data-types/basic-data-types/#specifying-time)"
is the number of seconds since the "Ripple Epoch" of January 1, 2000 (00:00
UTC). This is similar to how the [Unix epoch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_time)
works, except the Ripple Epoch is 946,684,800 seconds after the Unix Epoch. Do
not convert Ripple Epoch times to Unix Epoch times in 32-bit variables, as this
could lead to integer overflows.

```

publishers. If they want to publish both versions simultaneously, then
they will need to communicate different URLs to operators. If not, then
they can wait until an appropriate time (e.g. when enough nodes have
upgraded, or if they want to pressure nodes to upgrade), and then make
a single clean switchover from v1 to v2.

In terms of the code, if the file version is 1, then rippled will follow
the v1 rules, and if it's 2, rippled will follow the v2 rules.

Pros:
* Keeps rippled code simple
* If a publisher chooses to publish a v2 UNL file while there are still
  nodes on the network that won't understand it, newer peers will
  [communicate](#protocol-changes-for-v2-unl-broadcasts) the "current"
  UNL to older peers, if they're connected sufficiently.

Cons:
* Adoption will probably be delayed until some other "limiting event" or
  synchronization point happens which forces all nodes to upgrade. This
  will most likely be when an amendment is enabled that no v1-only nodes
  support.

See the [appendix](#appendix) for descriptions of some other migration
strategies that were considered and rejected.

-------------------------------------------- ---------

> :bangbang: Since this code was merged, there have been several amendments enabled on Mainnet,
>   so there are no versions of rippled that don't support v2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:bangbang: Support for XLS-45 has been fully deployed across all XRPL Mainnet
nodes.

This is because, after the "UNLv2" implementation was included in a release,
amendments from that release (or later) have been enabled. For details, see
[Amendment Blocked Servers](https://xrpl.org/docs/concepts/networks-and-servers/amendments/#amendment-blocked-servers).
```

##### `ValidatorList::updateTrusted`

`updateTrusted` will be modified to take the `closeTime` of the
validated ledger (this might available in the caller
`NetworkOPsImp::beginConsensus` as `closingInfo.parentCloseTime`, but
check the implementation to confirm, and get the correct value if not)
and a `const&` to the `NetworkOPsImp` calling object.

For all time comparisons, if the wall clock time is more than 30 seconds
ahead of the `closeTime`, it will be used instead.

* While iterating over the publisher lists, if the first entry in `remaining`
  has an `effective` date before the `closeTime`, then it will be moved to
  `current`, and removed from `remaining`.
* Additionally, the `expiration` will be compared to the `closeTime`. If
  the `current` VL has expired and no replacement has been pulled out of
  `remaining`, then in addition to calling `removePublisherList`, call
  [`NetworkOPs::setUNLBlocked`](#stopping-and-resuming-operations-on-expiration).
  (Note that `removePublisherList` is also called from
  `ValidatorList::verify`, but that removes the publisher entirely. As
  currently implemented, if there is another publisher configured, the

>   node will not get stuck. Is this behavior correct?)

Reviewer: Should a rippled github issue be opened for tracking this question?

Author: Couldn't hurt

Reviewer 2: @intelliot can you open this issue?
